---
title: "Links that speak: The global language network and its
        association with global fame"
tags: [large sample, natural language, culture]
authors:
 - Ronen, Shahar
 - Gonçalves, Bruno
 - Hu, Kevin Z.
 - Vespignani, Alessandro
 - Pinker, Steven
 - Hidalgo, César A.
year: 2014
venue: PNAS
volume: 111
issue: 52
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1410931111
pages: E5616--E5622
url: http://www.pnas.org/content/111/52/E5616
...

The paper we're looking at today isn't about security, but it's
relevant to anyone who's doing field studies of online culture, which
can easily become part of security research.  My own research right
now, for instance, touches on how the Internet is used for online
activism and how that may or may not be safe for the activists; if you
don't have a handle on online culture---and how it varies
worldwide---you're going to have a bad time trying to study that.

What we have here is an analysis of language pairings as found on
Twitter, Wikipedia, and a database of book translations.  Either the
same person uses both languages in a pair, or text has been translated
from one to the other.  Using these pairs, they identify "hub"
languages that are very likely to be useful to connect people in
distant cultures.  These are mostly, but not entirely, the languages
with the greatest number of speakers.  Relative to their number of
speakers, regional second languages like Malay and Russian show
increased importance, and languages that are poorly coupled to English
(which is unsurprisingly right in the middle of the connectivity
graph), like Chinese, Arabic, and the languages of India, show reduced
importance.

There is then a bunch of hypothesizing about how the prominence of a
language _as a translation hub_ might influence how famous someone is
and/or how easy it is for something from a particular region to reach
a global audience.  That's probably what the authors of the paper
thought was most important, but it's not what I'm here for.  What I'm
here for is what the _deviation_ between "translation hub" and "widely
spoken language" tells us about how to do global field studies.  It
is obviously going to be more difficult to study an online subculture
that conducts itself in a language you don't speak yourself, and the
fewer people do speak that language, the harder it will be for you to
get some help.  But if a language is widely spoken but _not_ a
translation hub, it may be difficult for you to get the right _kind_
of help.

For instance, machine translations between the various modern
vernaculars of Arabic and English are not very good at present.  I
could find someone who _speaks_ any given vernacular Arabic without
too much difficulty, but I'd probably have to pay them a lot of money
to get them to translate 45,000 Arabic documents into English, or even
just to tell me which of those documents were in _their_ vernacular.
(That number happens to be how many documents in my research database
were identified as some kind of Arabic by a machine classifier---and
even that doesn't work as well as it could; for instance, it is quite
likely to be confused by various Central Asian languages that can be
written with an Arabic-derived script and have a number of Arabic
loanwords but are otherwise unrelated.)

What can we (Western researchers, communicating primarily in English)
do about it?  First is just to be aware that global field studies
conducted by Anglophones are going to be weak when it comes to
languages poorly coupled to English, even when they are widely spoken.
In fact, the very fact of the poor coupling makes me skeptical of the
results in _this_ paper when it comes to those languages.  They only
looked at three datasets, all of which are quite English-centric.
Would it not have made sense to supplement that with polylingual
resources centered on, say, Mandarin Chinese, Modern Standard Arabic,
Hindi, and Swahili?  These might be difficult to find, but not being
able to find them would tend to confirm the original result, and if
you could find them, you could both improve the lower bounds for
coupling to English, and get a finer-grained look at the languages
that are well-translated within those clusters.

Down the road, it seems to me that whenever you see a language cluster
that's widely spoken but not very much in communication with any other
languages, you've identified a gap in translation resources and
cultural cross-pollination, and possibly an underserved market.
"[Scanlations](http://fanlore.org/wiki/Scanlation)" make a good
example: the lack of officially-licensed translations of comic books
(mostly of Japanese-language manga into English) spawned an entire
subculture of unofficial translators, and that subculture is partially
responsible for increasing mainstream interest in the material to the
point where official translations are more likely to happen.
